docs/usage.md, before:

# Using Grafana to Query your logs

To query and display your logs you need to configure your Loki to be a datasource in your Grafana.

> _Note_: Querying your logs without Grafana is possible by using [logcli](./logcli.md).

## Configuring the Loki Datasource in Grafana

Grafana ships with built-in support for Loki as part of its [latest release (6.0)](https://grafana.com/grafana/download).

1. Log into your Grafana, e.g, http://localhost:3000 (default username: `admin`, default password: `admin`)
1. Go to `Configuration` > `Data Sources` via the cog icon on the left side bar.
1. Click the big `+ Add data source` button.
1. Choose Loki from the list.
1. The http URL field should be the address of your Loki server e.g. `http://localhost:3100` when running locally or with docker, `http://loki:3100` when running with docker-compose or kubernetes.
1. To see the logs, click "Explore" on the sidebar, select the Loki datasource, and then choose a log stream using the "Log labels" button.

Read more about the Explore feature in the [Grafana docs](http://docs.grafana.org/features/explore) and on how to search and filter logs with Loki.

> To configure the datasource via provisioning see [Configuring Grafana via Provisioning](http://docs.grafana.org/features/datasources/loki/#configure-the-datasource-with-provisioning) and make sure to adjust the URL similarly as shown above.

## Searching with Labels and Distributed Grep

A log query consists of two parts: **log stream selector**, and a **search expression**. For performance reasons you need to start by choosing a log stream by selecting a log label.

The log stream selector will reduce the number of log streams to a manageable volume and then the regex search expression is used to do a distributed grep over those log streams.

### Log Stream Selector

For the label part of the query expression, wrap it in curly braces `{}` and then use the key value syntax for selecting labels. Multiple label expressions are separated by a comma:

`{app="mysql",name="mysql-backup"}`

The following label matching operators are currently supported:

- `=` exactly equal.
- `!=` not equal.
- `=~` regex-match.
- `!~` do not regex-match.

Examples:

- `{name=~"mysql.+"}`
- `{name!~"mysql.+"}`

The [same rules that apply for Prometheus Label Selectors](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/#instant-vector-selectors) apply for Loki Log Stream Selectors.

### Regex Search Expression

After writing the Log Stream Selector, you can filter the results further by writing a search expression. The search expression can be just text or a regex expression.

Example queries:

- `{job="mysql"} error`
- `{name="kafka"} tsdb-ops.*io:2003`
- `{instance=~"kafka-[23]",name="kafka"} kafka.server:type=ReplicaManager`

### Query Language Extensions

The query language is still under development to support more features, e.g.,:

- `AND` / `NOT` operators
- Number extraction for timeseries based on number in log messages
- JSON accessors for filtering of JSON-structured logs
- Context (like `grep -C n`)

Commit message:

Document the filter expression sytax.
Signed-off-by: Tom Wilkie <tom.wilkie@gmail.com>

docs/usage.md, after:

# Using Grafana to Query your logs

To query and display your logs you need to configure your Loki to be a datasource in your Grafana.

> _Note_: Querying your logs without Grafana is possible by using [logcli](./logcli.md).

## Configuring the Loki Datasource in Grafana

Grafana ships with built-in support for Loki as part of its [latest release (6.0)](https://grafana.com/grafana/download).

1. Log into your Grafana, e.g, http://localhost:3000 (default username: `admin`, default password: `admin`)
1. Go to `Configuration` > `Data Sources` via the cog icon on the left side bar.
1. Click the big `+ Add data source` button.
1. Choose Loki from the list.
1. The http URL field should be the address of your Loki server e.g. `http://localhost:3100` when running locally or with docker, `http://loki:3100` when running with docker-compose or kubernetes.
1. To see the logs, click "Explore" on the sidebar, select the Loki datasource, and then choose a log stream using the "Log labels" button.

Read more about the Explore feature in the [Grafana docs](http://docs.grafana.org/features/explore) and on how to search and filter logs with Loki.

> To configure the datasource via provisioning see [Configuring Grafana via Provisioning](http://docs.grafana.org/features/datasources/loki/#configure-the-datasource-with-provisioning) and make sure to adjust the URL similarly as shown above.

## Searching with Labels and Distributed Grep

A log query consists of two parts: **log stream selector**, and a **filter expression**. For performance reasons you need to start by choosing a set of log streams using a Prometheus-style log stream selector.

The log stream selector will reduce the number of log streams to a manageable volume and then the regex search expression is used to do a distributed grep over those log streams.

### Log Stream Selector

For the label part of the query expression, wrap it in curly braces `{}` and then use the key value syntax for selecting labels. Multiple label expressions are separated by a comma:

`{app="mysql",name="mysql-backup"}`

The following label matching operators are currently supported:

- `=` exactly equal.
- `!=` not equal.
- `=~` regex-match.
- `!~` do not regex-match.

Examples:

- `{name=~"mysql.+"}`
- `{name!~"mysql.+"}`

The [same rules that apply for Prometheus Label Selectors](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/#instant-vector-selectors) apply for Loki Log Stream Selectors.

### Filter Expression

After writing the Log Stream Selector, you can filter the results further by writing a search expression. The search expression can be just text or a regex expression.

Example queries:

- `{job="mysql"} |= "error"`
- `{name="kafka"} |~ "tsdb-ops.*io:2003"`
- `{instance=~"kafka-[23]",name="kafka"} != kafka.server:type=ReplicaManager`

Filter operators can be chained and will sequentially filter down the expression - resulting log lines will satisfy _every_ filter.  Eg:

`{job="mysql"} |= "error" != "timeout"`

The following filter types have been implemented:

- `|=` line contains string.
- `!=` line does not contain string.
- `|~` line matches regular expression.
- `!~` line does not match regular expression.

### Query Language Extensions

The query language is still under development to support more features, e.g.,:

- `AND` / `NOT` operators
- Number extraction for timeseries based on number in log messages
- JSON accessors for filtering of JSON-structured logs
- Context (like `grep -C n`)
